Pragmatic Innovations in Post-Acute and Long-Term Care Medicine

Feasible new, practical products or approaches intended to improve outcomes or processes in post-acute or long-term care

Adapting Gerontechnological Development to Hospitalized Frail
Older People: Implementation of the ALLEGRO Hospital-Based
Geriatric Living Lab
Frédéric Noublanche MS a,b, Cécile Jaglin-Grimonprez c, Laurence Laignel c,
Guillaume Sacco MD, PhD a,b, Philippe Allain PhD b,
Cédric Annweiler MD, PhD a,b,d,*, on behalf of the SAM Group
a Department of Geriatric Medicine and Memory Clinic, Research Center on Autonomy and Longevity, University Hospital, Angers, France
b Laboratoire de Psychologie des Pays de la Loire, LPPL EA 4638, SFR Conﬂuences, University Angers and University Nantes, France
c General Direction, University Hospital, Angers, France
d Department of Medical Biophysics, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, Robarts Research Institute, The University of Western Ontario, London,
Ontario, Canada

a b s t r a c t

Gerontechnology aims at improving the functioning of older people and their carers in their daily lives as well as improving gerontological practices. To
promote gerontechnology innovation in the hospital and bridge the gap between gerontechnology developers and hospitalized frail older patients, our
objective was to create and implement a hospital-based geriatric living lab. We designed a hospital-based living lab, providing reﬂexive workshops
bringing around the table gerontechnology users and developers, supplemented with an experimental hospital room receiving both the users and the
devices to be tested. Three different types of users were distinguished: seriously ill older inpatients, professional hospital caregivers, and informal carers.
Three different kinds of devices were also distinguished: prototypes under development, new services and/or care organizations, and new uses. Finally,
we were able to open in 2018 the Angers Living Lab En GéRiatrie hOspitalière (ALLEGRO) hospital-based geriatric living lab. ALLEGRO offers the orga-
nization of "idea incubator workshops" for users and developers, together with one “experimental hospital room” equipped with validated devices to
provide reference measures used as a standard to test the diagnostic efﬁcacy of prototypes. The room is intended to accommodate one older inpatient
with severe acute organic failures. No patient selection is planned at admission, apart from consent to research. Until now, no refusal to participate in a
study was noted. In conclusion, we offer a new and unprecedented hospital-based geriatric living lab to improve hospital care for older inpatients and to
promote successful aging through gerontechnology.

Ó 2020 AMDA e The Society for Post-Acute and Long-Term Care Medicine.

Keywords: Gerontechnology, hospital, innovation, living lab, older adults

Problem

The increased number and proportion of older adults worldwide is
the source of demographic, epidemiological, societal, economic, and
health challenges.1 A 3-fold increase in the number of people over 85
is expected in the coming 20 years, notably those designated as “frail”

All projects conducted in the ALLEGRO hospital-based geriatric living lab will be
approved by either local or national ethics committees, according to the design and
nature of the studies. Participants will be included after giving their written
informed consent for research, or their legal representatives’ consent if mental
capacity is impaired. The studies will be conducted in accordance with the ethical
standards set forth in the Helsinki Declaration (1983).

C.A.’s program ALLEGRO is supported in part by a grant “Plus de Vie 2017” from
“Fondation Hôpitaux de Paris Hôpitaux de France.” F.N. is supported by a doctoral
fellowship grant from Angers Loire Métropole (2018-2021). G.S. is supported by a
postdoctoral grant from Research Center on Autonomy and Longevity, University
Hospital of Angers, France (2019-2020). The sponsors had no role in the design and
conduct of the study, in the collection, management, analysis, and interpretation of
the data, or in the preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript.

The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.

* Address correspondence to Cédric Annweiler, MD, PhD, Department of Geriatric

Medicine, Angers University Hospital, 49933 Angers cedex 9, France.

E-mail address: Cedric.Annweiler@chu-angers.fr (C. Annweiler).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jamda.2020.01.001
1525-8610/Ó 2020 AMDA e The Society for Post-Acute and Long-Term Care Medicine.

due to a high number of chronic diseases, a high degree of disability,
and unsuitable residential, family, and social changes.2 To meet these
challenges, optimizing the environment to better support and care for
older adults becomes a priority. The sustainability of an aging society
depends on its capacity to innovate, including assistive technologies
that enable independent living and the social participation of older
people in optimal conditions of health, comfort, and safety.

One solution to face geriatric issues lies on innovation e in
particular, innovation in new technology applied to older adults. Such
innovation has been labeled “gerontechnology.”3 Gerontechnology, by
improving the living environment and compensating for the loss of
independence and autonomy among frail older adults, has the po-
tential to sustain and maintain independence at home.3

Unfortunately, the hospital care system remains out of step with
the emergence of gerontechnology. Hospitals, although caring for
large numbers of older adults,
immediate life-
threatening issues and are understandably less attentive to func-
tional problems of frail older inpatients. Additionally, it is clear that
innovations from civil society are generally not designed for hospital
environment, whether regarding the needs of older inpatients or
regarding the very speciﬁc regulations of hospital environment.4 This
suggests that gerontechnology developers, although possessing the

focus on acute,

F. Noublanche et al. / JAMDA 21 (2020) 550e554

551

capacity for innovation, do not apprehend the real needs and expec-
tations of hospitalized frail older end-users.

We hypothesized that a real-world laboratory, such as a hospital-
based geriatric living lab, would help to address these issues. Living
labs are realistic environments designed to create links between
technology developers and end-users. Living labs enable end-users to
communicate their needs and expectations directly to technology
developers (co-design), and to participate in prototype testing (co-
development).4e8 To our knowledge, to date, no hospital-based geri-
atric living lab offers an experimental hospital room hosting true older
inpatients and allowing them to use and test prototypes under
development.9 Our objective was to create and implement a hospital-
based geriatric living lab to promote open hospital innovation and
bridge the gap between gerontechnology developers and hospitalized
frail older patients.

Innovation

The founding reﬂection was led by the last author (C.A.), who
brought both clinical experience and questioning as a senior geria-
trician, clinical research experience as an academic, and overall vision
as a team manager. A working group involving nurses, research as-
sistants, administrators, and a patient representative then provided
the reﬂexive assistance that is necessary to build a coherent and
efﬁcient project. Past experiences in community living labs, notably
transcribed in the white paper on living labs,7 were also very helpful.

Speciﬁcations for the Living Lab

First, we started by deﬁning the scope and needs that would justify
the development of a hospital-based geriatric living lab. A hospital-
based geriatric living lab would be expected to (1) connect hospital
users and gerontechnology developers in order to facilitate upward
(needs expression) and downward (expression of technological pos-
sibilities) exchanges, and (2) propose a place of care to test the
acceptability, feasibility, efﬁcacy, reproducibility, reliability, and safety
of devices under development with true older inpatients.

Second, we deﬁned 3 different types of users who could be assisted
by gerontechnology innovation in hospitals: the older frail hospital-
ized inpatients, the professional caregivers in geriatric hospitals, and
ﬁnally the informal carers of older inpatients.

Third, we listed the hospital needs of older inpatients that would
justify gerontechnology research: (1) to improve the cure and care of
the serious pathology that led to hospital admission, (2) to compen-
sate for disabilities resulting from this serious pathology, (3) to pre-
vent and/or correct iatrogenic disability, and (4) to promote the return
home after the hospitalization. These needs are clearly different from
those faced by older adults when they live at home, which justiﬁes the
development of hospital-based living labs for gerontechnology dedi-
cated to geriatric units and hospitals.

Fourth, according to the deﬁnition and perimeter of living labs,6 we
selected 3 different kinds of devices that would be assessed within the
hospital-based geriatric living lab: (1) prototypes (ie, devices under
development and not yet marketed that would be tested by users with
rapid feedbacks to gerontechnology developers in order to adapt the
production trajectory), (2) new services and/or new care organiza-
tions, and (3) potential diversiﬁcations of use of tools that are mar-
keted either in nonhospital settings or for a nonsenior population.

Fifth, we deﬁned the potential gerontechnology developers with
whom the living lab would partner. To promote open hospital inno-
vation, we chose to open the hospital living lab not only to developers
from the public sector, higher education, and civil society, but also to
partners from associations and from the private and industrial sectors,
without considering the size of the company (from startup to large
industrial groups, if applicable).

Requirements

In order to meet the different needs and to involve the end-users in
the most realistic way, the geriatric living lab would include a real
room intended to receive true older inpatients within a geriatric acute
care unit. Ideally, the unit would be located in a university hospital,
whose mission combines care, research, and teaching with signiﬁcant
visibility and a research culture that would foster gerontechnological
innovation and the acceptance of new concepts. Moreover, the room
should be realistic and provide common standards of care like any
hospital room, but also provide dimensions large enough to be able to
accommodate the devices to be tested. Based on our clinical experi-
ence with older inpatients, we proposed that the room should be
equipped with validated devices to provide reference measures and
monitoring of (1) vital constants and weight, (2) the quantity and
quality of mobility within the room, and (3) the tracking of falls. We
also emphasized the needs to equip the room with a large panel of
plugs and connectors to accommodate diverse proposals for ger-
ontechnologies to be tested and to anticipate the accessibility of the
room to technicians for equipment installations and updates. It would
also be necessary to have a technical room close to the hospital room.
Finally, having a meeting room would facilitate meetings between
gerontechnology developers and users.

Operationalization of the Living Lab

The project would require a team of dedicated collaborators with
the following skills: knowledge in health, technological development,
marketing, management, and academic research. Because of the aca-
demic positioning of the living lab in a university hospital, and to
protect the users’ rights toward experimentation and innovation, we
proposed a research model based on that of academic research, that is,
with a scientiﬁc committee to which the project applications would be
submitted from gerontechnology developers. Consistent with the
white paper on living labs,7 an ethical agreement would not be
required at the step of the implementation of the living lab. In
contrast, each letter of intent retained by the scientiﬁc committee
would lead to the drafting of an academic research protocol, submit-
ted to the competent authorities including the ethics committees.
Written informed consent would then be signed by the userdand by
the trusted person, if applicabledafter reading the information letter.
Finally, an economic model should be clearly deﬁned to ensure the
sustainability of the project, with the hospital providing no other
funding than that of a standard hospital room with related medical
and nursing staff. In particular, the sharing of the intellectual property
of the innovations codesigned and codeveloped in the living lab
should be negotiated on a case-by-case basis with the partners. The
search for funding and research grants was also explored from the
very start of the project.

Implementation

The Angers Living Lab En GéRiatrie hOspitalière (ALLEGRO)
living lab was ﬁnally delivered in
hospital-based geriatric
November 2018 in the Geriatric Department of the University
Hospital of Angers, France.

ALLEGRO may offer 2 types of services after validation by the
scientiﬁc committee bringing together user representatives and ex-
perts from the biomedical, engineering, and internet of things ﬁelds
(see Figure 1 for the procedural circuit within the ALLEGRO living
lab).

The ﬁrst service is the organization of “idea incubator workshops”
gathering around the table the gerontechnology developers and the
hospital end-users. All types of users can be targeted, that is, the older
their informal carers, and the professional hospital
inpatients,

552

F. Noublanche et al. / JAMDA 21 (2020) 550e554

Fig. 1. Procedural circuit for projects within the ALLEGRO hospital-based geriatric living lab. A downloadable PDF of this form is available at www.sciencedirect.com.

F. Noublanche et al. / JAMDA 21 (2020) 550e554

553

caregivers, depending on the developer’s ﬁeld of expertise. Work-
shops can be offered, for example, so that users can explain clearly
their daily in-hospital needs and allow developers to use their
expertise wisely to create projects that meet real expectations.
Another objective can be to ask the users’ opinions on devices being
developed about the appearance, the satisfaction of use, the perceived
utility, or even possible new uses.

The second service is the opening of an “experimental hospital
room” within the geriatric acute care unit. The spacious room of 24 m2
is equipped with devices for measuring vital signs (temperature, blood
pressure, pulse, weight, scope) and with an invisible electronic ﬂoor
recording all movements in the room and tracking any falls. These
reference measures are used as a standard to test the diagnostic efﬁ-
cacy of prototypes tested in the room, for example, those supposed to
detect falls.

The room is intended to accommodate one older inpatient aged
75 years and over with severe acute organic failures. No patient
selection is planned at admission to ensure no recruitment bias,
and patients are admitted consecutively as in any other room in the
unit. General information on the living lab is communicated to
patients and relatives at the time of admission. Then, speciﬁc in-
is communicated, and the signed
formation on each protocol
informed consent
in
progress. The studies are conducted in accordance with the ethical
standards set forth in the Helsinki Declaration (1983). All projects
conducted in the ALLEGRO hospital-based geriatric living lab are
approved by ethics committees. Participants are included after
giving their written informed consent for research, or their legal
representatives’ consent, if mental capacity is impaired. Patients
may agree to participate in some protocols, but not all or even none
if they do not wish to.

is collected separately for each protocol

Evaluation

Frail Older Inpatients Hospitalized in the Living Lab

After less than 4 months of activity, 14 patients (10 females; me-
dian age, 87 years; median Mini-Mental State Examination score, 19.5/
30) have been admitted to the ALLEGRO experimental room. The
hospital emergency department referred 10 patients, whereas the
other 4 were admitted directly from their homes. In total, 6 patients
were referred to the department for an acute somatic problem, 5 for a
cognitive-behavioral problem, and 3 for recurrent falls. Three patients
usually lived in retirement homes, the others in their private homes.
The average length of stay in the room was 10.8 days, which was
similar to other patients in the unit over this period.

Partnerships and Experimentations

As academics, we did not wish to directly solicit the developer
partners. We initially based our external communication on the
regional and national mainstream press and by participating in
several national conferences. This made it possible to share our
existence and our service offer with developers who were eager to
extend their market to the hospital world. After less than 4 months
of activity, 7 gerontechnology developers have already signed a
partnership agreement with the University Hospital, including 4
startups and 3 national groups. Several interventions were carried
out or are programmed in ALLEGRO, including 4 feasibility studies,
3 satisfaction studies, 3 protocols for a diversiﬁcation of use, 1 test
of diagnostic efﬁciency and reliability, and 7 reﬂexive workshops.
For the moment, we have not had a refusal from patients or rela-
tives to participate in an experiment within the room. No experi-
ments have yet been proposed to professional caregivers or
informal carers.

Comment

We were able to set up the ﬁrst hospital-based geriatric living lab
equipped with an experimental room receiving in the same space both
seriously ill older inpatients and prototypes of developing ger-
ontechnologies to be tested. This model should help to bridge the gap
between gerontechnology developers and frail older inpatients.

Gerontechnology aims to improve the daily lives of older people
and their carers, as well as gerontological practices. Although many
startups and businesses have embarked on the creation of innovative
products or services for home-based care, the hospital environment
has so far received little attention from the Silver Economy.4 Geriatric
issues are, however, particularly frequent and serious in hospitals
because of the large number of older patients, and are signiﬁcantly
different from those encountered at home because of the severe acute
organic failures that justify the hospitalization. The organization of
care in hospitals is not always adapted to frail older people, which
generates a risk of loss of function called iatrogenic disability.10
Whether gerontechnologies compensate for or alleviate the deﬁcits
of older inpatients or whether they stimulate or accentuate their ca-
pacities, they may improve hospital care for older inpatients and
promote successful aging. However, the use of gerontechnologies may
also involve some risks that should call for caution. The ﬁrst one is to
be driven by the technological innovation capabilities rather than the
interest of the older person. In this case, the innovative object may
respond to a need imagined by the developers rather than a need
actually felt by the older inpatients or the health professionals and will
not ﬁnd a market. The second risk is that of substitution when ger-
ontechnology aims to replace caregivers rather than complementing
one another. This may result in involuntary isolation of the older in-
patients, for whom human relations remain yet a priority. Assessing
and avoiding these risks while designing and developing hospital
tools and services of the future is precisely the reason for the existence
of the ALLEGRO living lab.

Such a hospital-based geriatric living lab has many strengths and
interests. First, from the older inpatients’ point of view, the living lab
may help them meet researchers, industry, and public institutions
with whom they are usually not in touch, as well as to participate in
the codesign and codevelopment of new technologies to improve
hospital care. Second, in terms of industrial valuation, the living lab
should reduce the development and marketing cycles of products and
services, reduce development risks, enrich the innovation process by
promoting a richer connection with users, facilitate the appropriation
of products and services by users, and ﬁnally identify concrete and
signiﬁcant applications in hospitals. It is about promoting open hos-
pital innovation. Third, in terms of economic valuation, the living lab
makes it possible to explore and discover new desires, to invest in new
uses, and ﬁnally to identify promising markets. Fourth, in terms of
academic valuation, the living lab is expected to produce and
communicate new scientiﬁc knowledge, to add value to the clinical
trials through gerontechnology, to develop nursing research, and to
train users (ie, patients and caregivers) in the practical use of ger-
ontechnologies under realistic conditions.

Our hospital-based geriatric living lab, however, has a certain
number of already identiﬁable limitations. First, ALLEGRO is limited by
having only 1 experimental room, which lengthens the duration of
studies or limits the theoretical number of participants who can be
included in protocols. However, this limitation should be soon
amended by the upcoming increase in the amount of experimental
rooms in the unit. In addition, it is noticeable that some protocols may
include older inpatients from the geriatric unit who are not neces-
sarily hospitalized in the experimental room. Second, the ﬁrst stages
of the ALLEGRO project were carried out thanks to research grants.
The sustainability of the living lab will, however, depend on our ability
to develop a viable business model through the ﬁnancial support of

554

F. Noublanche et al. / JAMDA 21 (2020) 550e554

technology developers and/or the co-ownership of jointly created
innovations. Third, it is of note that being a pioneer in this area, the
existence of speciﬁcities of care and cure for the hospitalized frail
older patients is not obvious for most gerontechnology developers,
and each meeting requires a signiﬁcant amount of explanations and
pedagogy to explain the interest of exploring and meet these speciﬁc
needs. Fourth, the very principle of living labs leads to accepting all
older inpatients usually referred to our unit in order to limit selection
bias and maintain the comparability, without selection (apart from the
consent to research). Thus, the population tested in the living lab
consists mainly of older inpatients with major neurocognitive disor-
ders and behavioral disorders. The use and interest of a hospital-based
living lab in this population remains yet unclear thus far, and should
be subject to further analyses.

Conclusions and Implications

We were able to offer a new and unprecedented service using a
hospital-based geriatric living lab to improve hospital care for older
inpatients and promote successful aging through gerontechnology.

Acknowledgments

The authors acknowledge Romain Simon, MSc, Melinda Beau-
denon, MSc, and Jennifer Gautier, MSc, from the Research Center on

Autonomy and Longevity, University Hospital of Angers, France, for
daily assistance, and Charlotte Huet, from General direction, Univer-
sity Hospital of Angers, France, for her help in ﬁnding funding. There
was no compensation for their contributions.

References

1. Sanderson WC, Scherbov S, Gerland P. Probabilistic population aging. PLoS One

2017;12:e0179171.

2. Cesari M, Calvani R, Marzetti E. Frailty in older persons. Clin Geriatr Med 2017;

33:293e303.

3. Sheets DJ, La Buda D, Liebig PS. Gerontechnology. The aging of rehabilitation.

Rehab Manag 1997;10:100e102.

4. Annweiler C, Noublanche F, Jaglin-Grimonprez C, Bubien Y. Built environments

for frail older adults: The now and next. Maturitas 2018;116:137e138.

5. Kusiak A. Innovation: The living laboratory perspective. Comput Aid Design

Appl 2007;4:863e876.

6. European Network of Living Labs

(ENoLL). Available at: http://www.

openlivinglabs.eu. Accessed July 14, 2019.

7. Dubé C, Sarrailh J, Billebaud C, et al. Qu’est-ce qu’un living lab? Montréal.
Available at: http://www.montreal-invivo.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/
livre-blanc-LL-Umvelt-Final-mai-2014.pdf; 2004. Accessed December 30, 2019.
8. Korman M, Weiss PL, Kizony R. Living Labs: Overview of ecological approaches

for health promotion and rehabilitation. Disabil Rehabil 2016;38:613e619.

9. Noublanche F, Jaglin-Grimonprez C, Sacco G, et al. The development of ger-
ontechnology for hospitalized frail elderly people: The ALLEGRO hospital-based
geriatric living lab. Maturitas 2019;125:17e19.

10. Sourdet S, Lafont C, Rolland Y, et al. Preventable iatrogenic disability in elderly

patients during hospitalization. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2015;16:674e681.

The pragmatic innovation described in this article may need to be modiﬁed for use by others; in addition, strong evidence does not yet exist
regarding efﬁcacy or effectiveness. Therefore, successful implementation and outcomes cannot be assured. When necessary, administrative and
legal review conducted with due diligence may be appropriate before implementing a pragmatic innovation.

